CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to AI Guards

Thank you for your interest in contributing to AI Guards! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing to this project.

## Development Setup

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/aicoders-academy/ai-guards.git
   cd ai-guards
   ```

2. Install dependencies:
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. Link the package locally for testing:
   ```bash
   npm link
   ```

4. Build the project:
   ```bash
   npm run build
   ```

5. Run in development mode:
   ```bash
   npm run dev
   ```

## Project Structure

```
ai-guards/
├── bin/                  # Global script for quick initialization
├── src/                  # Source code
│   ├── commands/         # CLI commands
│   ├── utils/            # Utility functions
│   └── templates/        # Template files
├── dist/                 # Compiled JavaScript code
├── package.json          # Project metadata and dependencies
└── tsconfig.json         # TypeScript configuration
```

## Commands

### Available Commands

- `init`: Initializes AI Guards in a project
- `plan`: Generates a plan template file to be edited by the user

### Adding a New Command

1. Create a new file in the `src/commands/` directory
2. Implement the command using the Commander.js pattern
3. Import and register the command in `src/index.ts`

Example:

```typescript
// src/commands/your-command.ts
import { Command } from 'commander';

export default function yourCommand(program: Command): void {
  program
    .command('your-command')
    .description('Description of your command')
    .option('-o, --option <value>', 'Description of option')
    .action(async (options) => {
      // Command implementation
    });
}

// Then in src/index.ts
import yourCommand from './commands/your-command';
// ...
yourCommand(program);
```

## Plan Templates

Plans are generated as templates that users can edit with their text editor. When adding features related to plans:

1. Maintain the structure with frontmatter metadata and markdown sections
2. Ensure the template is helpful but not overly prescriptive
3. Keep plan IDs unique using the `generatePlanId` utility
4. Follow the standard plan sections (Scope, Requirements, etc.)

## Code Style

- Follow the existing code style
- Use TypeScript for type safety
- Write meaningful comments
- Add proper error handling

## Testing

All new features and fixes should include tests. We use Jest for testing and ts-jest for TypeScript support.

### Test Structure

Tests are organized in the `src/__tests__/` directory, mirroring the structure of the source files they test.

### Writing Tests

1. Create test files with a `.test.ts` extension
2. Use proper mocking to isolate the component being tested
3. Test both successful and error paths
4. Aim to maintain high code coverage (currently ~98% line coverage)

### Running Tests

```bash
npm test
```

To run a specific test file:

```bash
npm test -- src/__tests__/path/to/test.test.ts
```

To check code coverage:

```bash
npm run test:coverage
```

This will generate coverage reports in the `coverage/` directory.

## Submitting Changes

1. Create a branch for your changes
2. Make your changes and commit them
3. Push your branch and create a pull request
4. Describe your changes in the pull request

## License

By contributing to AI Guards, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the project's license.

Commit message:

Adicionar documentação sobre o processo de lançamento no RELEASE.md e atualizar CONTRIBUTING.md com instruções para mantenedores. Criar workflows para publicação automática no npm e criação de releases no GitHub, incluindo verificação de versão e geração de notas de lançamento.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to AI Guards

Thank you for your interest in contributing to AI Guards! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing to this project.

## Development Setup

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/aicoders-academy/ai-guards.git
   cd ai-guards
   ```

2. Install dependencies:
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. Link the package locally for testing:
   ```bash
   npm link
   ```

4. Build the project:
   ```bash
   npm run build
   ```

5. Run in development mode:
   ```bash
   npm run dev
   ```

## Project Structure

```
ai-guards/
├── bin/                  # Global script for quick initialization
├── src/                  # Source code
│   ├── commands/         # CLI commands
│   ├── utils/            # Utility functions
│   └── templates/        # Template files
├── dist/                 # Compiled JavaScript code
├── package.json          # Project metadata and dependencies
└── tsconfig.json         # TypeScript configuration
```

## Commands

### Available Commands

- `init`: Initializes AI Guards in a project
- `plan`: Generates a plan template file to be edited by the user

### Adding a New Command

1. Create a new file in the `src/commands/` directory
2. Implement the command using the Commander.js pattern
3. Import and register the command in `src/index.ts`

Example:

```typescript
// src/commands/your-command.ts
import { Command } from 'commander';

export default function yourCommand(program: Command): void {
  program
    .command('your-command')
    .description('Description of your command')
    .option('-o, --option <value>', 'Description of option')
    .action(async (options) => {
      // Command implementation
    });
}

// Then in src/index.ts
import yourCommand from './commands/your-command';
// ...
yourCommand(program);
```

## Plan Templates

Plans are generated as templates that users can edit with their text editor. When adding features related to plans:

1. Maintain the structure with frontmatter metadata and markdown sections
2. Ensure the template is helpful but not overly prescriptive
3. Keep plan IDs unique using the `generatePlanId` utility
4. Follow the standard plan sections (Scope, Requirements, etc.)

## Code Style

- Follow the existing code style
- Use TypeScript for type safety
- Write meaningful comments
- Add proper error handling

## Testing

All new features and fixes should include tests. We use Jest for testing and ts-jest for TypeScript support.

### Test Structure

Tests are organized in the `src/__tests__/` directory, mirroring the structure of the source files they test.

### Writing Tests

1. Create test files with a `.test.ts` extension
2. Use proper mocking to isolate the component being tested
3. Test both successful and error paths
4. Aim to maintain high code coverage (currently ~98% line coverage)

### Running Tests

```bash
npm test
```

To run a specific test file:

```bash
npm test -- src/__tests__/path/to/test.test.ts
```

To check code coverage:

```bash
npm run test:coverage
```

This will generate coverage reports in the `coverage/` directory.

## Submitting Changes

1. Create a branch for your changes
2. Make your changes and commit them
3. Push your branch and create a pull request
4. Describe your changes in the pull request

## Release Process

For maintainers who need to release new versions, please refer to [RELEASE.md](RELEASE.md) for detailed instructions on the automated release process.

## License

By contributing to AI Guards, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the project's license.
